Welcome back to the deep dive. We have a fascinating and I have to say a frankly
quite challenging stack on the desk today. I've spent the last 24 hours with a paper that I think
is going to force us to exercise some serious mental distinctives. I think that's a fair way
to put it. It's titled Scalar Eruption Via Entropic Differential. The authors just list
as Flixian and it's dated February 14th, 2026. It is certainly a dense piece of work. It's one
of those papers that doesn't just ask you to learn a new concept. It sort of asks you to
unlearn a few old ones first. Right. And that's exactly where I want to start because when I
first saw the title, you know, Scalar Eruption Entropic Differential, my initial thought was
we were looking at something in, I don't know, high energy fluid dynamics or maybe some obscure
corner of material science. Sure. It has that feel. But as I started reading the abstract and
then digging into your notes, I realized the scope is just, it's so much bigger. We aren't talking
about fluids in a beaker. We're talking about the container of reality itself. Precisely. It's a
cosmological paper, but it's a non-standard one, a very non-standard one. It's proposing a mechanism
for how the universe creates structure, stars, galaxies, clusters that stands in, well, in stark
contrast to the model we've all accepted for the last century. You're talking about the standard
model, the Big Bang. The Big Bang, inflation, dark energy, the whole suite, the entire paradigm.
Okay. So before we really get into the weeds of eruption, let's just set the stakes here.
Mm-hmm. The standard model is incredibly successful. I mean, we have the cosmic microwave
background. We have redshift data from countless galaxies. We have the abundance of light elements.
It works. It works remarkably well.
So why on earth should we entertain a paper that seems to want to throw all of that out?
Is this just, you know, contrarianism for the sake of it?
And that is absolutely the right question to ask. And to be fair to Fliction, the paper doesn't suggest
the standard model is wrong in the sense that the data is wrong. Not at all. It suggests that our
interpretation of that data might be, well, constrained. Constrained by a very specific
geometric assumption we made a long time ago. Which assumption is that?
The assumption that the universe is expanding.
Wow. Okay. But that's a load-bearing wall, though. I mean, if you take away expansion,
the whole roof caves in on modern cosmology.
Unless you build a new kind of roof. And that is what this paper attempts to do. It proposes what
it calls a non-expanding plenum. A non-expanding plenum.
It asks a truly radical question. What if the universe is a static, fixed volume? What if the
stage doesn't stretch, but the actors on the stage are behaving in a way that, well, that mimics the
signals of expansion? That is a massive claim.
I mean, if the universe isn't getting bigger, we need a completely new explanation for how things
form. In the standard view, right, it's gravity creating structure while expansion is constantly
trying to rip it apart. It's this cosmic tug of war. A delicate balance. Exactly. If you just
remove the expansion part of that equation, shouldn't gravity just win immediately? Shouldn't
everything just collapse into a black hole? Or the opposite. Everything would just sit there
in a boring high entropy soup. A heat death state from the very beginning. That's the classic
problem with a static universe. It usually implies either immediate collapse or just eternal boredom.
So it's a dead end, theoretically. It has been, historically. But this is where Fliction's solution comes in. How do you get a dynamic, interesting, structure-filled universe in a fixed room? I'm all ears. You introduce a new engine. A completely different kind of engine. A mechanism that drives structure formation, not through gravitational collapse-fighting expansion, but through something called scalar eruption. Okay, let's define our terms then.
Fliction talks about a plenum. Now, in my mind, a vacuum is empty space. Is a plenum just a fancy academic word for space?
It's a very important philosophical and physical distinction. A vacuum, in the classical sense, is the absence of stuff. It's a void. Emptiness. Right. A plenum, and this idea dates all the way back to Aristotelian physics and later Descartes, is a space that is full. It implies that space itself is a substance. It's a material manifold, not just an empty stage.
So it has properties. It has, what, texture? A substance to it. It has density, it has flow, and crucially, it has capacity. The paper defines this plenum very specifically as a smooth, compact, spatial manifold.
Okay, compact usually means finite in math. It's not infinite. Exactly. It implies the universe has a specific fixed size. It's a closed system. And the paper explicitly states, and this is a direct quote, no metric expansion. There is no scale factor, no AT that gets bigger with time.
So the box is closed and the box is full. What is it full of? Because if it's just full of, say, hydrogen gas, we're right back to that boring soup problem.
This is where we get into what the paper calls the coupled system. Section one outlines the ingredients of this plenum. There are three main components that are constantly interacting to make this entire machine work.
Okay, let's break them down. Ingredient number one.
First, you have the scalar field, which they denote with the Greek letter phi, fiduli.
We hear about scalar fields a lot in physics, things like the Higgs field. For, you know, for someone listening, how should we visualize a scalar field in this context?
The easiest way is to think of temperature in a room. Every single point in the room has a temperature value. That's a scalar field.
In this theory, a flay represents the potential mass, or you could say, the raw material of structure. It's the clay from which stars and galaxies will eventually be molded.
Okay, so we have a room full of this clay-like potential.
I got it. Ingredient number two.
The vector flow, which is denoted by Weiler.
Can vectors have direction, unlike temperature?
Exactly. Unlike temperature, which is just a number, a vector is an arrow. It has a magnitude and a direction.
So think of wind velocity in that same room. The clay isn't just sitting there inert. There are currents. There is advection.
The plenum has this constant internal circulation.
So the clay is swirling around. It's not static.
It's in motion. And now for ingredient number three, which is really the linchpin of the entire theory, entropy density, denoted by dollars.
Entropy. This is usually the villain of the story in cosmology. Entropy is disorder. It's the coffee getting cold. It's the universe winding down towards heat death.
In standard thermodynamics, yes. It's the arrow of time leading to decay.
We are, as a discipline, obsessed with equilibrium.
Systems naturally want to slide down the entropy hill until they are flat, boring, and, well, dead.
The drop of ink spreads out in the water until it's just a uniform gray sludge.
But Fliction isn't interested in the gray sludge.
No. This paper is focused on the exact opposite. It's about non-equilibrium instability.
It's interested in those rare, specific moments where the ink doesn't spread out.
Does it? Unspread? Does it gather itself back into a drop?
Under very specific conditions, yes.
The paper argues that entropy isn't just a passive measure of disorder, it's an active player in the physics.
It's directly coupled to the scalar field, to the clay.
Okay.
And this brings us right to the core mechanism of the paper, the battle between diffusion and amplification.
Let's unpack that. Diffusion is the smoothing out process, right?
The ink spreading out.
Correct. The paper assigns this a characteristic scale, which it calls 70 dollars.
And in the equations, you see a Laplacian operator acting on the field.
The Laplacian. That's the upside-down triangle squared, right? The natal of two.
That's the one.
And mathematically, all the Laplacian does is measure the difference between a value at a point and the average value of its neighbors.
Okay. Let's visualize that.
If I'm a hot spot in an otherwise cold room, the Laplacian at my point is large because I'm very different from my neighbors.
Exactly.
And diffusion acts to minimize that difference.
It's a force that tells the hot spot to cool down and give its energy to its neighbors and tells the cold spot to warm up.
It wants everything to be the same.
It's diffusive smoothing.
It's the great equalizer in physics.
So normally, this GAS, or gradient anisotropic smoothing, as they call it, is the engine that's running the show, keeping the universe uniform and boring.
Exactly. It's the default state.
But then we introduce the twist, the scalar eruption.
This is a threshold phenomenon.
It happens when that entire smoothing process is hijacked and completely reversed.
Reversed. So instead of cooling down, the hot spot gets even hotter.
Yes. Instead of the ink spreading, it clumps.
It actively gathers more ink from its surroundings.
But that that?
That sounds like it violates the second law of thermodynamics.
You can't just unmix the ink from the water.
That's a decrease in local entropy.
You can, if you pay for it energetically.
And the currency here, the thing that pays the thermodynamic bill, is something the paper calls entropy curvature.
Entropy curvature.
Okay.
It's another one of those dense phrases.
What does it mean for entropy, a measure of disorder, to be curved?
Imagine the distribution of entropy in this plenum, not as a flat, uniform sheet, but as a landscape, a terrain with hills and valleys.
The curvature is a measure of how sharp those hills and valleys are.
Are they gentle rolling hills, or are they sharp peaks?
Okay. So it's the geometry of the entropy field itself.
Precisely.
The paper introduces what it calls an effective potential, $2, which directly couples the scalar field, Devere, to the laplacian of the entropy.
That laplacian is the curvature.
So the shape of the entropy landscape directly affects the behavior of the matter field.
Deeply.
There is a critical term in the main evolution equation, beta-elaphia-delta-g-s.
Here, elaphia is just a coupling constant.
It determines how strongly these two things, matter and entropy, talk to each other.
What happens when they talk?
Well, when the entropy curvature, that delta-g-sac term, becomes negative enough, which means you are at the very top of a very sharp hill of entropy, a state of high local compression.
It flips the sign of the diffusion coefficient in the equation.
It flips the sign.
I want to stop on that for a second to make sure everyone listening understands the gravity of that.
In the math of diffusion, a positive coefficient means smoothing.
That's the normal world.
Right.
Positive diffusion means things spread out.
They equilibrate.
So a negative coefficient.
A negative coefficient means things gather together.
It's anti-diffusion.
The paper calls it exponential amplification, or, in their preferred terminology, eruption.
So if I'm just a little random fluctuation of matter, a little bit more density than my neighbors, and I happen to wander into a region where the entropy is curved just right.
The laws of physics locally invert for you.
Instead of being sanded down and smoothed out by the universe, you are fed.
You start to actively accrete more scalar field from your surroundings, you grow.
And you grow exponentially.
That is the eruption.
It's a localized explosion of structure, born out of nothing but a ripple in the entropy.
It is.
The paper describes it as a bifurcation in entropic geometry.
The system has a choice, and it splits.
The uniform state, the gray sludge, suddenly becomes unstable.
It's no longer the comfortable, low-energy place to be.
Like a pencil balanced on its tip.
Perfect analogy.
The system must fall into a structured state to satisfy the new energy conditions.
So structure isn't an accident in this model.
In the Big Bang, it sort of is.
It comes from tiny quantum fluctuations.
Here, structure is a mandate.
That's a beautiful way to put it.
In the Big Bang model, structure is a bit of a struggle.
It's gravity fighting against expansion.
Here, structure is the inevitable release valve for compressed entropy.
This implies the universe has a kind of geography to it.
It's not just the same everywhere.
There are, what, safe zones where smoothing happens and danger zones where eruption happens.
Fouclesian maps this out explicitly in Section 3 of the paper.
They introduce these wonderful concepts of entropy vaults and crack points.
Entropy vaults.
It really sounds like something out of a heist movie.
Okay, team, we have to break into the entropy vault.
The analogy holds up surprisingly well.
An entropy vault is defined as a region where the entropy is locally concave downward.
In simpler terms, it's a pocket of highly compressed entropy.
High pressure, high potential.
It's where the energy for creation is stored.
So the plenum has these invisible batteries of potential energy scatter all around.
Yes, waiting for a trigger.
And that trigger is the crack point.
The paper denotes it as $6 dollars.
It's the specific infinitesimal location where that pressure becomes too much.
It's the point where the curvature crosses the critical threshold path.
That's the trigger.
That's the spark.
That's the exact mathematical point where the effective diffusion coefficient goes from positive to negative.
The paper calls this the mathematical analog of a crack in the plenum.
I love that imagery.
Picture a vast, perfectly smooth sheet of ice.
The ice is the smoothing regime.
It holds everything flat and stable.
But if pressure builds up from below, that's the entropy vault, eventually the ice cracks and water shoots up through the crack.
And that jet of water is the scalar eruption.
Exactly.
And that jet of water over time becomes a star.
Or a galaxy or a supercluster, depending on the scale of the bolt and the crack.
The scale of the instability, yes.
This leads right into those two distinct states, the paper names.
The Lamphron and the Lamphrodine.
I have to say, Fliction has a real knack for naming things.
These sound like sci-fi tech from a video game.
They do, don't they?
But they describe two very different thermodynamic phases or regimes of the plenum.
So the Lamphron state, this is the ice.
The boring, stable state.
Yes.
In the Lamphron state, the paper introduces a vacuum response field.
Which they called NICHA, and in this state, is negative.
Negative response.
So that means it resists change.
It's suppressive.
It means suppression.
If a little fluctuation tries to pop up, the Lamphron field actively pushes it back down.
It's a stabilizing force.
Get back in line.
It maintains stability and uniformity.
Most of the universe, according to the paper, is in this quiet Lamphron state.
It's the boring background canvas.
Then you have the Lamphrodine state.
This is the crack.
This is the jet of water.
Here it becomes positive.
The vacuum response flips.
It amplifies the fluctuation.
The paper mentions an inverted harmonic oscillator here, and I want to dig into that because
a harmonic oscillator is like physics 101.
That's a pendulum or a marble in a bowl, right?
Right.
It's the model for almost everything stable in the universe.
Imagine a bowl.
You put a marble in it.
The marble rolls to the bottom, and it stays there.
That's a stable harmonic oscillator.
If you nudge it, it just rolls back to the bottom.
That's the Lamphron state.
Stability.
Okay.
Simple enough.
Now, flip the ball upside down, and you carefully, perfectly balance the marble on the very top.
That's incredibly unstable.
The slightest breeze, and it's gone.
That is the inverted harmonic oscillator.
If you nudge that marble even a microscopic amount, a quantum fluctuation, it doesn't roll back.
It rolls away.
And the further it rolls, the faster it goes.
It's exponential growth.
Gravity is actively amplifying the initial nudge.
Exactly.
And in the Lamperdine state, the entropy curvature acts just like gravity on that upside-down bowl.
It takes a tiny quantum fluctuation of virtual particle, nothing, and rolls it down the hill,
amplifying it into a massive macroscopic structure like a galaxy.
So in this model, a galaxy is basically just a marble that fell off an entropy hill.
A marble that fell off a hill, which was created by the curvature of the vacuum itself.
Yes.
It's elegant.
We'll give it that.
It's a very compelling picture.
But it relies on this incredibly complex machinery.
The paper mentions a five-engine architecture.
We've talked about the smoothing engine, G-A-S, and the eruption engine, S-I-E-D.
But there are three others.
And I feel like if we don't understand those, we don't understand how this machine actually runs without, you know, just blowing itself up.
You're absolutely right.
It can't just be random explosions.
You need a system of regulation, of preparation, of memory.
And Flickshane proposes that it's a system of five coupled engines working in concert.
Okay.
So let's walk through them.
Engine one was G-S gradient anatropic smoothing.
We covered that.
That's the cleanup crew.
The great equalizer.
It's the engine that prevents the universe from just becoming a mess of white noise.
It enforces coherence.
Engine two.
DTR.
Mm-hmm.
Deferred thermodynamic reservoirs.
This one is fascinating.
It introduces the concept of time and memory into the mechanism in a very non-turdial way.
Deferred.
That implies a delay.
Things don't happen instantly.
Exactly.
In a lot of standard physics, we model things as Markovian, which is a fancy way of saying what happens now depends only on the state right now.
The past doesn't matter.
Right.
But DTR suggests the system is non-Markovian.
It has a memory.
It remembers its past states.
So the entropy that's stored in one of those volts doesn't just act instantly.
It acts through what the paper calls a memory kernel.
The energy stored in an entropy vault might not be released immediately when the conditions are right.
It can be held back, buffered for a period of time.
This creates a time lag, or what engineers would call hysteresis in the system.
And why is that important?
What does adding a delay do?
Because it creates rhythms.
It creates oscillations.
If everything happened instantly, you just get one big flash and that's it.
But with delays, you can get cycles.
You get pulses of creation.
It allows the universe to breathe, to have a cadence.
Okay, so DTR provides the timing and the rhythm.
Engine 3.
PTLR.
This is a mouthful.
Poincaré triggered lattice recrystallization.
It is, but it's absolutely crucial for propping up the whole static universe argument.
It's the engine that recharges the battery.
Lattice and recrystallization.
That implies a grid, a crystal structure.
Are we back to living in a simulation?
Not necessarily a simulation in the pop culture sense, but it does suggest a discrete reality.
The paper posits that the plenum isn't infinitely smooth at the smallest scales.
It's pixelated.
It has a fundamental lattice spacing, which they call dollars.
Okay, so space is a grid.
A crystal.
A crystal plenum, yes.
And this brings in the brilliant French mathematician Henri Poincaré.
He proved a theorem back in the 19th century called Poincaré recurrence.
I think I remember this one.
In simple terms, it says that if you have a closed system, like our finite, compact box of a universe,
with a finite number of possible states, the pixels on the grid,
then eventually the system must return to a state that is arbitrarily close to its initial state.
History repeats itself.
Literally.
Mathematically, yes.
Given enough time, the atoms in this room will spontaneously arrange themselves back to the way they were an hour ago.
The timescales are just astronomically long.
Okay.
Fliction argues that this recurrence is what charges the batteries.
As the system cycles through its vast but finite number of states,
it naturally re-concentrates entropy in certain areas just by random chance over eons.
It rebuilds the entropy vaults.
So the PTLR engine is the battery charger.
It takes the dissipated, used-up entropy and, through these recurrence cycles,
gathers it back together into the vaults for the next round.
Exactly.
It creates the preconditions for eruption.
Without the lattice and the recurrence theorem, the universe would run out of juice.
It would have one burst of creation and then die.
With PTLR, it's a self-renewing, perpetual motion machine of creation.
Okay, so to recap, PTLR charges the battery, DTR sets the timer for when the battery goes off.
And engine 4, S-I-E-D, the scalar eruption, is the spark.
It's the actual release of that energy.
Which leaves engine 5, and this is the one that really got me, NFR, the neutrino fossil registry.
This is the one that keeps me up at night.
Yeah.
It's a wild idea.
Fossil registry.
It implies a record is being kept.
The paper has to address a very serious problem.
In a closed, static box, where does the information go?
Where does the waste heat go?
In the Big Bang model, information and energy eventually leave our observable horizon.
They are, for all practical purposes, lost to us.
But here, nothing can leave the box.
So doesn't the box just fill up with clutter?
With waste heat?
Does it not just fry itself over time?
That seems like a big problem.
The NFR is the proposed solution.
It suggests the box creates a library, not just a junkyard.
The paper claims that the residue of every single eruption,
the thermodynamic cost of creating a star, the information of its formation,
is encoded into weakly interacting fields.
Specifically, the neutrino background.
Neutrinos, the ghost particles.
They can pass through light years of lead without hitting a single atom.
Which makes them the perfect storage medium.
Because they interact so rarely,
the information they carry doesn't get corrupted or degraded.
Fliction suggests that the cosmic neutrino background
isn't just random noise from the Big Bang.
It's a fossilized entropy trace.
So every star, every galaxy, every structure that has ever existed
in the entire history of this timeless plenum
has left a permanent signature, a ghost, in the neutrino field.
A memory operator is the term they use.
It suggests that if you could build a detector sensitive enough
to read the precise state of the neutrino background with incredible precision,
you could reconstruct the 4D history of the entire cosmos.
That is a staggering thought.
The universe is a self-recording hard drive
and we're just swimming through the data.
It creates a perfect closed loop.
Smoothing, GAS, cleans things up.
Recurrence, PTLR, gathers the fuel.
Memory, DTR, sets the timing.
Eruption, SIED, creates the structure.
And the registry, NFR, records the history.
It's a perfect perpetual machine.
But.
And okay, here is the but I've been holding back this whole time.
I knew it was coming.
The elephant in the room.
You can build a beautiful machine in the world of equations.
It can be elegant and self-consistent.
But at some point, we have to look out the window.
And when we look out the window, we see redshift.
We see that every distant galaxy is moving away from us.
And the further away they are, the faster they appear to move.
Edwin Hubble discovered this 100 years ago.
It is the bedrock of modern observational cosmology.
How can Fliction possibly explain redshift in a static box?
This is, without a doubt, the most controversial part of the paper.
It's in Section 5, Implications and Observables.
And Fliction knows this is the hill their theory has to climb or die on.
They directly challenged the Doppler interpretation of redshift.
The Doppler effect is pretty basic physics, though.
A train moves away from you, its whistles pitch drops.
A galaxy moves away from you, its lights color drops, it redshifts.
It is basic physics if the object is actually moving through space or if the space between
you and it is expanding.
But Fliction argues for a third possibility, an acoustic signature mechanism.
Acoustic.
You mean sound, like sound waves in space.
In a sense.
Remember, this isn't a vacuum.
It's a plenum.
It's a medium.
A substance.
When an eruption happens, when a galaxy bursts forth, it sends shockwaves ripples through
the scalar field and the entropy field.
Like dropping a stone in a pond.
Exactly.
Now, imagine billions of stones being dropped all over the pond for eons.
The entire plenum is vibrating.
It's humming with the energy of creation.
The paper argues that light traveling through this vibrating, high-entropy medium loses energy
over vast distances via a process they call internal redistribution.
So the light gets tired as it travels.
That's an old theory.
Tired light.
I thought that was debunked decades ago because any scattering process that makes light lose
energy would also blur the images of distant galaxies.
And we don't see that.
They're perfectly sharp.
And fliction anticipates the tired light critique.
They're very clear that this isn't a random scattering process, which would cause blurring.
They argue it's a coherent lattice interaction because the universe is a crystal, a grid.
The energy loss is quantized and directional.
It's not random.
And it perfectly mimics the mathematical signature of a recession velocity, that linear relationship
with distance without any actual recession.
That is a very, very fine needle to thread, argument-wise.
It is.
It's a huge claim.
But they try to bolster it by pointing to another major piece of cosmological evidence,
Baryon acoustic oscillations, or BAO.
Right, the BAO.
Yeah.
These are the giant rings or bubbles of galaxies we see in large-scale surveys.
In standard cosmology, these are leftover sound waves from the plasma of the very early universe.
They're like a standard ruler printed on the cosmos.
That's the standard interpretation.
Fliction, however, shows that their five-engine system naturally produces what they call quasi-periodic
structure formation that looks exactly like the BAO data.
So the rings of galaxies we see aren't echoes of the Big Bang.
They are their resonance patterns of the vibrating plenum.
Like Kladni figures.
You know when you sprinkle sand on a metal plate and vibrate it with a violin bow?
And the sand arranges itself into these beautiful, intricate geometric patterns?
Yes, of course.
Flix Slimshin is arguing the universe is a Kladni plate.
The galaxies form at the nodes of the vibration, the quiet spots.
And the voids are the antinodes, the places with high vibration.
And the paper also mentions that the growth of structure is band-limited.
Which directly supports the Kladni plate idea.
You don't get structure at every possible size.
You get distinct bands or preferred scales of structure.
The size of galaxies, the size of clusters, the size of superclusters.
It's harmonic.
It has a musical quality to it.
Okay, I'm starting to see the picture they're painting.
It's not an explosion.
It's a symphony.
It's a resonating chamber.
A symphony in a fixed, finite concert hall.
Yes.
But there is still one more layer to this onion.
The deep theory section.
I think it's section 17.
It just drops this reference to the AKS-ZBV formulation.
Ah, yes.
Bottle and Vilkovisky.
This is definitely for the hardcore physics and math listeners out there.
I tried to read it, and I'll be honest, my eyes just crossed.
Can you break it down, why do they need to bring in this incredibly high-level geometry?
What does it add?
It's about robustness.
It's about proving that this isn't just a clever toy model.
In modern physics, if you propose a new field or a new interaction, you have to prove it plays nicely with quantum field theory.
You have to show it's gauge invariant.
Which, in simple terms, means the physics doesn't break when you change your coordinate system or your point of view.
Essentially, yes.
The AKS-Z formulation is an incredibly powerful mathematical framework for handling these very complex, constrained systems.
But the key takeaway from that section isn't really about the math itself.
It's about the topological implications.
Topology.
The study of shapes that are preserved under stretching and bending.
The donut and the coffee cup being the same thing.
That's the one.
The paper makes the argument that a scalar eruption fundamentally changes the homotopy type of the solution space.
Okay.
In English, what does that mean?
Imagine you have a rubber band that is stretched around a tall, smooth cylinder.
You can slide that rubber band up and down the cylinder.
You can wiggle it, but you can't pop it off without breaking it.
That's a topological constraint.
Its state space is like a circle.
Okay, I'm with you.
Now imagine the cylinder suddenly, spontaneously, splits into two separate cylinders, standing side by side.
The rubber band situation has fundamentally changed.
It's not just in a new position.
It's in a new kind of space.
Its state space has a different shape.
A different topology.
The geometry of its possible existence has shifted.
That's it.
Flixian saying that an eruption, the formation of a star or a galaxy, isn't just matter moving around in space.
It's a fundamental change in the connectedness of the vacuum itself.
When a star forms, it punctures the topology of the Lamfrond state.
It leaves behind a deep, geometric scar.
This implies that matter and space are much more intertwined than we typically think.
Matter isn't just sitting in space.
It is a twisting of space.
A change in its fundamental nature.
Which brings us, in a very strange way, right back to Einstein.
Matter tells spacetime how to curve.
Spacetime tells matter how to move.
Flixian is just rewriting the dictionary of how that conversation happens.
It's not gravity and curvature.
It's entropy and topology.
It's a breathtaking proposal.
I'm still stuck on the static part, though.
It feels so claustrophobic compared to the infinite, expanding dark of the Big Bang.
Or does it feel cozy?
Does it feel like a home?
That's one way to look at it, I suppose.
Think about the philosophical shift for a moment.
In the Big Bang model, we are debris.
We are the shrapnel from a primordial explosion flying apart, getting colder and lonelier every single second.
Right.
The universe is expanding and we are just drifting away into an eventual heat death.
It is inherently a bit nihilistic when you think about it.
But in the plenum, we aren't shrapnel.
We are crystals growing in a nutrient-rich solution.
We are eruptions of latent potential.
We are supposed to be here.
We are the system realizing its own complexity.
It feels almost biological.
It really does.
At one point, the paper even references Turing patterns, the mathematics that explains how leopards get their spots or how patterns form on seashells.
This theory attempts to unify cosmology with the mathematics of biology.
The universe is a living skin and galaxies are the patterns forming on that skin.
And we are living inside one of those patterns.
A self-organizing, self-recording crystal.
It's a beautiful thought.
A really beautiful thought.
Whether it's true, well, that's for the telescopes and the particle accelerator to decide.
But as a framework for thinking, it's incredibly powerful.
At the very least, it challenges us to look at the data we already have with fresh eyes.
And that really is what science is all about.
Before we close, I just want to circle back one last time to that neutrino fossil registry.
Because if that is real, if that is not just a mathematical convenience to solve the information problem.
If it's real, it changes everything about our relationship to the past.
We usually think of the past as something that's gone.
It's vaporized.
It only exists in our memories or in light that's traveled for billions of years.
But the NFR says the past is right here, superimposed on the present.
We are literally swimming through the ghosts of the last billion or trillion or however many years this plenum has existed.
And if we could build a detector sensitive enough.
We could watch the first stars turn on.
Not by looking billions of light years away at ancient light.
But by looking at the neutrinos passing through this room right here, right now.
We could, in principle, play back the tape of cosmic history.
It gives a whole new meaning to the phrase deep dive.
Indeed it does.
Fliction, whoever you are, wherever you are, you've certainly given us a lot to think about.
From negative diffusion to the lattice plenum to this cosmic library.
It's a heavy stack, but I think we're better for having wrestled with it.
Agreed.
It's good to stretch the mental muscles every once in a while.
Thanks for walking us through the math and the metaphors.
And to you listening, the next time you look up at the night sky, ask yourself, are you seeing the dying embers of an ancient explosion?
Or are you seeing a garden growing in the dark?
Something to mull over.
Thanks for listening.
We'll see you on the next deep dive.